这里我们再强调一下这三类：dulcet shepherds、noble savages、bland utopians。I repeat that: they were not simple folk — not dulcet shepherds, not noble savages, not bland utopians。Citizens，all of us，not simple。作者在这里做了一个反复的强调。

这是第二次说了。所以答案并不简单，not simple。这三类当中，dulcet shepherds 指的是英国文学中典型的田园生活里的那么一个群体，他们喜欢歌唱，shepherds 就是牧羊人，在唱歌。

noble savages，高贵的野蛮人，指的是没有经过文明开化、没有被文明污染的人；bland utopians，平淡的乌托邦主义者，utopia 这个词出自托马斯·莫尔的《乌托邦》。总之 Omelas 的居民都不属于这三类。They were not less complex than us，他们的复杂程度并不比我们低。

我们这种坏习惯，是把幸福视作愚蠢。继续看：this is the treason of the artist。下面我们要说，为什么提到了艺术家？什么叫艺术家的背叛？treason 是叛国罪的意思，但在这里并不是说叛国，我们翻译为背弃——this is the treason of the artist。

a refusal to admit the banality of evil and the terrible boredom of pain. If it hurts, repeat it. Do you understand these two sentences？我们这里要结合前面来理解。

前面提到，我们有一个坏习惯，就是被 pedants and sophisticates 广泛地怂恿之后，我们认为幸福好像是遥不可及的、虚无缥缈的、是愚蠢的。好，在这个语境下，我们来说这便是艺术家的背叛。他们是什么背叛呢？他们这种背叛指的就是 a refusal to admit：

不愿意承认罪恶是平庸的，the banality of evil，也不愿意承认痛苦是乏味的，the terrible boredom of pain。那言外之意，这些艺术家——也就是一些写作的人、从事艺术工作的人——他们眼中的邪恶是什么样的呢？邪恶不是平庸的，而是可怕的，是那种恐怖的面孔；痛苦也不是乏味的。

而是惊心动魄的、苦难深重的。他们的背叛，具体承担的就是这两点。那继续来看：If you can't lick 'em, join 'em. lick 是一个俚语，就是战胜——既然打不过就加入他。If it hurts, repeat it，越是痛苦，越是反复咀嚼。我们来结合接下来看。

好，这里我们稍微说一下。Only pain is intellectual, only evil interesting，这是一个很重要的句子，它是格言式的，而且用到了 parallelism，太有意思了，这种平行的结构。那翻译过来很简单，是吧？仿佛唯有痛苦才具有智慧，唯有邪恶才有趣味。

我们要结合前后。上面是说，我们被学究、被那些精于世故的人所说服——幸福是一种愚蠢，我们不要去追寻它。仿佛只有痛苦、只有苦难才是有智慧的，才是具有思想深度的。

哎，只有这种邪恶才是有趣的，才会进入文艺作品之中。This is the treason of the artist，那紧接着说就是我们刚刚讨论过的这两点。

So here's the question: how do you understand the treason of the artist？And why do artists describe evil and suffering instead of other subjects？

什么意思呢？越是痛，越是反复咀嚼。而拒绝承认邪恶的平庸——不是说艺术家都在歌颂邪恶，而是说这邪恶可能是艺术家创作的一个永恒主题：邪恶与痛苦。那他们笔下的邪恶与痛苦往往都走向宏大的灾难，而不是我们所说的平庸的乏味。

所以，如果痛，我们就反复咀嚼，为绝望唱起挽歌，那便是对幸福、对快乐的谴责。To praise despair is to condemn delight, to embrace violence is to lose hold of everything else. 各种苦难、各种绝望，就是对快乐的一种谴责；拥抱暴力，就等于丢掉了其他的一切。

We have almost lost hold; we can no longer describe a happy man, nor make any celebration of joy. 我们几乎已经丢掉了这种能力，几乎刻画不出一个幸福的人，也无法再为欢乐举行任何庆典。

那么这是不是很大的一个问题？How can I tell you about the people of Omelas？继续来看这个问题。

这里还涉及 authorial intrusion，介入式的作者。什么是 authorial intrusion？就是像我们旁白式的解说一样，作者直接与读者对话。前面他明明在写城里的景象，却突然插进一句：How can I tell you about the people of Omelas？后面还有多处这样的插入：there were no naive and happy children, though their children were in fact happy，这很好理解。

They were mature, intelligent, passionate adults whose lives were not wretched. 他们成熟、聪慧、热情，他们的生活并不悲惨。

真是奇迹！But I wish I could describe it better. I wish I could convince you. 这也是一种 authorial intrusion，我希望我可以说得更好，我希望我可以说服你。这在一般的叙事里通常是没有的。

Omelas sounds in my words like a city in a fairy tale, long ago and far away, once upon a time. Omelas 听起来像童话里的城市，很久很久以前、遥远的城市——时间上让你觉得久远，空间上让你觉得遥远，是童话故事。

Perhaps it would be best if you imagined it as your own fancy bids, assuming it will rise to the occasion, for certainly I cannot suit you all. rise to the occasion 什么意思？应付自如。那么翻译过来就是：最好的做法，就是随你怎么去想，只要它能应得上那个场面；因为我确实没法让所有人都满意。

For instance, how about technology? 那么，有关科技会是什么样的呢？他认为没有汽车，没有直升机。居民的幸福跟这个没有什么必然的联系——幸福的居民就不会有汽车、不会有直升机，我们继续来看。

This follows from the fact that the people of Omelas are happy people. Happiness is based on a just discrimination of what is necessary, what is neither necessary nor destructive, and what is destructive. 所以幸福建立在对这三类事物的区分之上：分清何为必需品、何为非必需且无害之物、何为具有破坏性的。

in the middle category，对中间这一条，however——that of comfort, luxury, exuberance, et cetera. They could perfectly well have central heating, subway trains, washing machines, and all kinds of marvelous devices not yet invented here: floating light-sources, fuelless power, a cure for the common cold. 句子很长，但不难理解。

那这里讨论的就是科技。中间这一条是非必需但无害的，那么这些东西他们完全可以有，还有一些能够带来便利的装置也可以有：悬浮的光源、无燃料的能源、感冒的解药。What is destructive? 作者提到的 destructive 的东西，就相当于 monarchy、slavery、stock exchange、advertisement、secret police 等等。

This kind of thing——就是前面提到的各类科技，他们也可以有；反过来，一点都没有也行。It doesn't matter，不重要。所以他对科技的态度其实是中立的。

One thing I know there is none of in Omelas is guilt. 我确知 Omelas 绝无愧疚。这里其实是为后文做了一个铺垫，guilt 是后面的一条主线。

But what else should there be? I thought at first there were no drugs, but that is puritanical. 还要有点啥呢？我起初想，不设毒品——仿佛他在跟读者商量，商量一下要怎么去构建 Omelas。但如果完全不设毒品，又太清教徒了。

作者这里自己造了一个词，叫 drooz，非常贴切。For those who like it, the faint insistent sweetness of drooz may perfume the ways of the city：喜欢它的人，可以让 drooz 那种淡淡的、挥之不去的甜香弥漫在城中。

drooz first brings a great lightness and brilliance to the mind and limbs, and then after some hours a dreamy languor, and wonderful visions at last of the very arcane and inmost secrets of the Universe, as well as exciting the pleasure of sex beyond all belief; and it is not habit-forming. 它先给思维和肢体带来极大的轻盈和光彩，几个小时之后是梦幻般的慵懒，最后让人窥见宇宙最幽深、最隐秘的奥义，还能激起超乎想象的肉体欢愉——而且它不会上瘾。

这不就是毒品吗？只有毒品才能带来这样的效果。咱们虽然没有长久的体验，但我可以想象，这应该就是毒品，只有它才能做到。但作者说它不是毒品，它不会上瘾。你看好不好，这种东西还不会上瘾。

For more modest tastes I think there ought to be beer. 口味温和一些的人，我觉得应该有啤酒。

What else, what else belongs in the joyous city? The sense of victory, surely, the celebration of courage. 还有什么属于这座欢乐之城？当然是胜利感，是对勇气的庆祝。But as we did without clergy, let us do without soldiers. 就像我们不要神职人员一样，我们也不要士兵。

The joy built upon successful slaughter is not the right kind of joy: it will not do; it is fearful and it is trivial. 建立在杀戮之上的快乐不是正确的快乐，不可取；那是可怕的，也是琐碎的。

A boundless and generous contentment, a magnanimous triumph felt not against some outer enemy but in communion with the finest and fairest in the souls of all men everywhere and the splendor of the world's summer: this is what swells the hearts of the people of Omelas, and the victory they celebrate is that of life. 一种无边而慷慨的满足，一种宽宏的胜利——它不是针对某个外在的敌人，而是与所有人灵魂中最美好、最公正的部分相通，与世界之夏的壮丽相通。这才是充盈 Omelas 人心的东西，他们庆祝的胜利是生命的胜利。

I really don't think many of them need to take drooz. 我真不觉得他们中有多少人需要靠 drooz。

大部分游行队伍这时已经到了 Green Fields。烤肉的香味从给养的红色、蓝色帐篷里飘出来，provisioners 就是供应者。

The faces of small children are amiably sticky; in the benign grey beard of a man a couple of crumbs of rich pastry are entangled. amiable 用来形容人，比如 an amiable young lady，也可以说 in an amiable mood，就是心情友善；crumbs 是面包的碎屑，entangled 是被缠住、缠在一起。小孩子的脸上黏黏的，很可爱；那位慈祥的灰白胡子的男人，胡须上还缠着几块糕点碎屑。

结合语境来看，前面提到的是我们吃的东西、是烹调，所以这里用 sticky 来形容小孩子脸上的那种黏。

翻译过来就是：那位男子慈祥的灰白胡须上，缠着几块点心的碎屑。

The youths and girls have mounted their horses——mount 就是上马——and are beginning to group around the starting line of the course. 年轻男女们已经上了马，开始聚集在赛道的起跑线附近。

干什么？要比赛，要赛跑，赛道起跑线。

An old woman, small, fat, and laughing, is passing out flowers from her basket, and tall young men wear her flowers in their shining hair. 那个身材矮胖、笑呵呵的老妇人正从篮子里分发花朵，高大的年轻男子把她的花戴在闪闪发亮的头发上。

他们吃得好，头发才有光泽；如果吃不好、营养不良，不会有这么多发亮的头发。

A child of nine or ten sits at the edge of the crowd, alone, playing on a wooden flute. 一个九岁、十岁左右的孩子独自坐在人群边缘，吹着木笛。这里写的是一位九岁左右的孩子，后面还会提到一个年龄相仿的孩子，先看这个人物。

People pause to listen, and they smile, but they do not speak to him, for he never ceases playing and never sees them, his dark eyes wholly rapt in the sweet, thin magic of the tune. 人们停下来听，微笑着，但不跟他说话——他不停地吹，也不看他们，一双黑眼睛完全沉醉在那甜美、纤细的魔幻旋律里。

注意这里的 rapt，意思是非常专注、完全投入，something that makes you notice nothing else，全神贯注。

He finishes, and slowly lowers his hands holding the wooden flute. 他吹完了，慢慢放下握着木笛的手。

As if that little private silence were the signal, all at once a trumpet sounds from the pavilion near the starting line: imperious, melancholy, piercing. 仿佛那小小的一段静默就是信号，起跑线附近的亭子里突然响起号声：专横、忧郁、刺耳。

前面写笛声用的是 sweet, thin, magic，都是非常和谐好听的；这里换成 imperious、melancholy、piercing 这三个形容词——专横、忧郁、刺耳，声音仿佛不再悦耳。这是在暗示叙事的转向，即将转入悲惨的部分。

（课间休息）

接着我们看声音的叙事功能。The horses rear on their slender legs, and some of them neigh in answer. 马儿抬起细长的腿直立起来，有几匹以嘶鸣回应。

Sober-faced, the young riders stroke the horses' necks and soothe them, whispering, "Quiet, quiet, there my beauty, my hope..." 面色严肃凝重的年轻骑手们抚摸着马儿的脖颈安抚它们，低声说：「安静，安静，我的美人，我的希望……」

The crowds along the racecourse are like a field of grass and flowers in the wind. 赛道两旁的人群，像风中摇曳的草地和花朵。

到这里 part one 就结束了，而这一句是转入第二部分的过渡。作者在这里提问：Do you believe? Do you accept the festival, the city, the joy? No? Then let me describe one more thing. 你相信吗？你接受这节日、这城市、这欢乐吗？不接受？那么让我再描述一件事。为什么要问接受不接受？因为作者想说，当你知道 one more thing 之后，你还接受不接受。接下来就要描述地下室里那个孩子。

```text
The Ones Who Walk Away from Omelas
Variations on a theme by William James (Excerpts)
Ursula K. Le Guin

With a clamor of bells that set the swallows soaring, the Festival of Summer came to the city Omelas, bright-towered by the sea. The rigging of the boats in harbor sparkled with flags. In the streets between houses with red roofs and painted walls, between old moss-grown gardens and under avenues of trees, past great parks and public buildings, processions moved. Some were decorous: old people in long stiff robes of mauve and grey, grave master workmen, quiet, merry women carrying their babies and chatting as they walked. In other streets the music beat faster, a shimmering of gong and tambourine, and the people went dancing, the procession was a dance. Children dodged in and out, their high calls rising like the swallows' crossing flights over the music and the singing. All the processions wound towards the north side of the city, where on the great water-meadow called the Green Fields boys and girls, naked in the bright air, with mud-stained feet and ankles and long, lithe arms, exercised their restive horses before the race. The horses wore no gear at all but a halter without bit. Their manes were braided with streamers of silver, gold, and green. They flared their nostrils and pranced and boasted to one another; they were vastly excited, the horse being the only animal who has adopted our ceremonies as his own. Far off to the north and west the mountains stood up half encircling Omelas on her bay. The air of morning was so clear that the snow still crowning the Eighteen Peaks burned with white-gold fire across the miles of sunlit air, under the dark blue of the sky. There was just enough wind to make the banners that marked the racecourse snap and flutter now and then. In the silence of the broad green meadows one could hear the music winding through the city streets, farther and nearer and ever approaching, a cheerful faint sweetness of the air that from time to time trembled and gathered together and broke out into the great joyous clanging of the bells.

Joyous! How is one to tell about joy? How describe the citizens of Omelas?

They were not simple folk, you see, though they were happy. But we do not say the words of cheer much any more. All smiles have become archaic. Given a description such as this one tends to make certain assumptions. Given a description such as this one tends to look next for the King, mounted on a splendid stallion and surrounded by his noble knights, or perhaps in a golden litter borne by great-muscled slaves. But there was no king. They did not use swords, or keep slaves. They were not barbarians. I do not know the rules and laws of their society, but I suspect that they were singularly few. As they did without monarchy and slavery, so they also got on without the stock exchange, the advertisement, the secret police, and the bomb. Yet I repeat that these were not simple folk, not dulcet shepherds, noble savages, bland utopians. They were not less complex than us. The trouble is that we have a bad habit, encouraged by pedants and sophisticates, of considering happiness as something rather stupid. Only pain is intellectual, only evil interesting. This is the treason of the artist: a refusal to admit the banality of evil and the terrible boredom of pain. If you can't lick 'em, join 'em. If it hurts, repeat it. But to praise despair is to condemn delight, to embrace violence is to lose hold of everything else. We have almost lost hold; we can no longer describe a happy man, nor make any celebration of joy. How can I tell you about the people of Omelas? They were not naive and happy children—though their children were, in fact, happy. They were mature, intelligent, passionate adults whose lives were not wretched. O miracle! But I wish I could describe it better. I wish I could convince you. Omelas sounds in my words like a city in a fairy tale, long ago and far away, once upon a time. Perhaps it would be best if you imagined it as your own fancy bids, assuming it will rise to the occasion, for certainly I cannot suit you all. For instance, how about technology? I think that there would be no cars or helicopters in and above the streets; this follows from the fact that the people of Omelas are happy people. Happiness is based on a just discrimination of what is necessary, what is neither necessary nor destructive, and what is destructive. In the middle category, however—that of the unnecessary but undestructive, that of comfort, luxury, exuberance, etc.—they could perfectly well have central heating, subway trains, washing machines, and all kinds of marvelous devices not yet invented here, floating light-sources, fuelless power, a cure for the common cold. Or they could have none of that: it doesn't matter. As you like it. One thing I know there is none of in Omelas is guilt. But what else should there be? I thought at first there were no drugs, but that is puritanical. For those who like it, the faint insistent sweetness of drooz may perfume the ways of the city, drooz which first brings a great lightness and brilliance to the mind and limbs, and then after some hours a dreamy languor, and wonderful visions at last of the very arcane and inmost secrets of the Universe, as well as exciting the pleasure of sex beyond all belief; and it is not habit-forming. For more modest tastes I think there ought to be beer. What else, what else belongs in the joyous city? The sense of victory, surely, the celebration of courage. But as we did without clergy, let us do without soldiers. The joy built upon successful slaughter is not the right kind of joy: it will not do; it is fearful and it is trivial. A boundless and generous contentment, a magnanimous triumph felt not against some outer enemy but in communion with the finest and fairest in the souls of all men everywhere and the splendor of the world's summer: this is what swells the hearts of the people of Omelas, and the victory they celebrate is that of life. I really don't think many of them need to take drooz.

Most of the processions have reached the Green Fields by now. A marvelous smell of cooking goes forth from the red and blue tents of the provisioners. The faces of small children are amiably sticky; in the benign grey beard of a man a couple of crumbs of rich pastry are entangled. The youths and girls have mounted their horses and are beginning to group around the starting line of the course. An old woman, small, fat, and laughing, is passing out flowers from a basket, and tall young men wear her flowers in their shining hair. A child of nine or ten sits at the edge of the crowd, alone, playing on a wooden flute. People pause to listen, and they smile, but they do not speak to him, for he never ceases playing and never sees them, his dark eyes wholly rapt in the sweet, thin magic of the tune.

He finishes, and slowly lowers his hands holding the wooden flute.

As if that little private silence were the signal, all at once a trumpet sounds from the pavilion near the starting line: imperious, melancholy, piercing. The horses rear on their slender legs, and some of them neigh in answer. Sober-faced, the young riders stroke the horses' necks and soothe them, whispering, "Quiet, quiet, there my beauty, my hope..." They begin to form in rank along the starting line. The crowds along the racecourse are like a field of grass and flowers in the wind. The Festival of Summer has begun.

Do you believe? Do you accept the festival, the city, the joy? No? Then let me describe one more thing.
```

In a basement under one of the beautiful public buildings of Omelas, or perhaps in the cellar of one of its spacious private homes, there is a room. 这是一个 periodic sentence——前面铺垫很长，主句在后：在 Omelas 某座漂亮的公共建筑的地下室里，或者是在某户宽敞的私宅的地窖里，有这么一个房间。

那么一个是 beautiful public building，一个是 spacious private home，两者形成一组对比。我们接着看后面如何描写。

It has one locked door, and no window. 大家就想象：一扇锁着的门，而且没有窗户。

A little light seeps in dustily between cracks in the boards, secondhand from a cobwebbed window somewhere across the cellar. seep 这个词什么意思呢？渗——水、空气或者光，一点点渗出来。只有一点点光，从木板的缝隙里带着灰尘渗进来，是从地窖另一端某个结满蛛网的窗户那里借来的光。

地窖里还是潮湿的，木板上的灰尘是散乱的。大家知道，在一丝光线之下，那些灰尘会更亮、更明显。

咱看，结满蛛网、这么阴暗的一个地方，好像不符合 Omelas 的美好——怎么会出现这么一段不合情景的描述呢？

In one corner of the little room a couple of mops, with stiff, clotted, foul-smelling heads, stand near a rusty bucket. 就是拖把头，又硬又板结，散发着恶臭。

小房间的角落里，靠着生锈的水桶，立着两把拖把。大家在脑海当中想象出这个画面。

The floor is dirt, a little damp to the touch, as cellar dirt usually is. 泥土的地面，摸上去有点潮湿，地窖的泥土通常都是这样。

不知道大家有没有去过这样的地方：阴暗，还有那种味道。The room is about three paces long and two wide: a mere broom closet or disused tool room. 三步长、两步宽，不过是一个扫帚柜或者废弃的工具室，又小又阴暗，既没有光，又潮湿又难闻。

In the room a child is seated. 居然有一个小孩在这里待着。那他在那里做什么呢？会玩吗？It could be a boy or a girl. 都不太确定他的性别，干脆就用 it 来形容他。

用了 it，就等于把他物化了，相当于不把他当人。It looks about six, but actually is nearly ten. 看起来是六岁，但实际上已经快十岁了。为什么快十岁了看起来像六岁一样？因为他居住的环境、生活条件太差了。

It is feeble-minded. Perhaps it was born defective, or perhaps it has become imbecile through fear, malnutrition, and neglect. 注意一下，可能是天生的缺陷，也可能是由于恐惧、营养不良和无人照看而变得痴呆。

他快十岁了，刚刚我们也看到了。It picks its nose and occasionally fumbles vaguely with its toes or genitals. 他抠着鼻子，偶尔含糊地拨弄自己的脚趾或生殖器。

It sits hunched in the corner farthest from the bucket and the two mops. 他蜷缩在离水桶和两把拖把最远的那个角落里，在黑暗中看不见任何光亮。

It is afraid of the mops. It finds them horrible. 他最害怕的就是拖把，觉得它们可怕极了。It shuts its eyes, but it knows the mops are still standing there; and the door is locked; and nobody will come. 他闭上眼睛，可是他知道拖把还立在那儿，门锁着，没有人会来。

你看，房间里那么小，就这么一处地方，可他还是害怕。The door is always locked; and nobody ever comes, except that sometimes—the child has no understanding of time or interval—sometimes the door rattles terribly and opens. 门永远是锁着的，没有人来，除了有时候——这个孩子对时间、对间隔没有任何概念——有时候门可怕地嘎吱作响，然后打开了。

如果让大家来分析这句话：所有的事情都很简单，用词都很简单。有没有很值得赏析的地方？

我们来看第一个 sometimes。他说到这里，突然插入了一个解释：the child has no understanding of time or interval，对时间和间隔没有什么认知。他也不知道所谓的 sometimes 到底是什么东西。

Sometimes the door rattles，有时候门会响，这就形成了一个对比：always 是永远如此，sometimes 是偶尔。那这个「偶尔」到底是多久呢？咱也不知道，因为孩子对时间没有感知了。有可能是两天来一次，有可能三天，有可能更久。有人来的时候，门就嘎吱作响，因为那个屋子是木头的。

One of them may come in and kick the child to make it stand up. The others never come close, but peer in at it with frightened, disgusted eyes. 其中一个人可能会进来，踢孩子一脚，让他站起来；其他人从不靠近，只是用惊恐、厌恶的眼睛朝里张望。

The food bowl and the water jug are hastily filled, the door is locked, the eyes disappear. 装着食物的碗和水的罐子被匆匆填满，门锁上，那些眼睛消失了。

在这里我们说，传统上讲，the eyes disappear 是用眼睛指代那些来看孩子的人，这是一种 metonymy，也可以用眼睛这个部分来代替整体。但是在这里，我觉得它更像是一种羞耻，更是在黑暗里令孩子非常恐惧的一个东西——那些眼神。因为这些人来的时候，都是可怕的象征。

可能好几天都没有一点动静，突然就有人来了，让人很害怕。出现之后也没有光亮，只看到门外透进来的一点亮光。The eyes disappear，然后又陷入了死寂。

The people at the door never say anything, but the child, who has not always lived in the tool room, and can remember sunlight and its mother's voice, sometimes speaks. "I will be good," it says. "Please let me out. I will be good!" They never answer. 门口的人从来不说话，可是这个孩子并不是一直住在这工具间里的，他还记得阳光和母亲的声音，所以有时候会开口：「我会乖的，求求你放我出去，我会乖的！」他们从不回答。

这太人性化了。所以他究竟是不是智力低下，也不好说——或者说，他最好是智力低下，否则对他更痛苦。注意这一个细节描写：the child who has not always lived in the tool room, and can remember sunlight and its mother's voice，他并不是生来就在这里，还记得阳光和母亲的声音。

倘若他失去了所有的记忆，那倒也好；但他还记得曾经的那些美好，这就是更大的问题。而且从来没有人理他。

The child used to scream for help at night, and cry a good deal, but now it only makes a kind of whining, "eh-haa, eh-haa," and it speaks less and less often. 过去他夜里还会尖声呼救，大哭不止，现在只剩下一种呜咽，「eh-haa，eh-haa」，说话也越来越少。

这种呼救的声音变得越来越少，最后只剩下一点呜咽。没有希望。It is so thin there are no calves to its legs; its belly protrudes. 他瘦得腿上没有小腿肚，肚子却鼓出来。

It is naked. Its buttocks and thighs are a mass of festered sores, as it sits in its own excrement continually. 他赤身裸体，屁股和大腿上长满了溃烂的疮，因为他一直坐在自己的排泄物里。

They all know it is there, all the people of Omelas. Some of them have come to see it; others are content merely to know it is there. They all know that it has to be there. 可能读者会想：Omelas 城这么美好，那大家难道不知道地下室里关了这么一个孩子、不把他放出去吗？是不是有很多人不知道这件事？不是，Omelas 的每一个人都知道。不知道的都会被带来，让他知道这件事。他们不光知道，而且全都接受了：他必须在那里。

Some of them understand why, and some do not, but they all understand that their happiness, the beauty of their city, the tenderness of their friendships, the health of their children, the wisdom of their scholars, the skill of their makers, even the abundance of their harvest and the kindly weathers of their skies, depend wholly on this child's abominable misery. 有些人明白其中的道理，有些人不明白，但他们都懂得：他们的幸福、城市之美、友谊的温暖、孩子的健康、学者的智慧、工匠的技艺，甚至丰收和宜人的天气，全都依赖于这个孩子令人憎恶的苦难。

所有的一切都依赖于那个孩子。

我读到这里就想：为什么偏偏是这一个孩子？我们一起来想。abominable 就是极坏的、令人憎恶的，extremely bad。

This is usually explained to children when they are between eight and twelve, whenever they seem capable of understanding; and most of those who come to see the child are young people, though often enough an adult comes, or comes back, to see the child. 这件事通常在孩子八到十二岁、看似能够理解的时候解释给他们听；来看这个孩子的大多是年轻人，不过也常有成年人来，或者回来看他。

前面我们提到，有时候是一个人来看，有时候是几个人来看。这暗示的是什么呢？就是让这些孩子知道这件事——在能够理解这件事的时候，每个人都要来看一次。而其中来看的，大多是年轻人。

No matter how well the matter has been explained to them, these young spectators are always shocked and sickened at the sight. 无论事情解释得多清楚，这些年轻的观众看到这一幕时，总是感到震惊和恶心。

They feel disgust, which they had thought themselves superior to. 他们感到厌恶——而这种厌恶，他们原以为自己已经超越了。They feel anger, outrage, impotence, despite all the explanations. 尽管有种种解释，他们仍然感到愤怒、义愤和无力。

They would like to do something for the child. But there is nothing they can do. 大家会想到，为什么不能改善一下他的生活条件呢？不能把他救出来吗？哪怕只是把这个房间打扫干净一点，不行吗？不可以。

If the child were brought up into the sunlight out of the vile place, if it were cleaned and fed and comforted, that would be a good thing, indeed; but if it were done, in that day and hour all the prosperity and beauty and delight of Omelas would wither and be destroyed. 假如把这个孩子从这污秽之地带到阳光下，假如他被打扫干净、喂饱、得到安慰，那确实是一件好事；可一旦这么做，Omelas 所有的繁荣、美好与欢乐就会在那一刻枯萎、被摧毁。Those are the terms. 条件就是如此。

To exchange all the goodness and grace of every life in Omelas for that single, small improvement; to throw away the happiness of thousands for the chance of the happiness of one: that would be to let guilt within the walls indeed. 用 Omelas 每一个人生活里全部的善与美好，去交换那一点小小的改善；为了一个人获得幸福的可能性，抛掉数千人的幸福——那才是真正让罪恶进入城墙之内。

The terms are strict and absolute; there may not even be a kind word spoken to the child. 条件严苛而绝对：甚至不能对这个孩子说一句温和的话。

这涉及到我们上一部分谈到的 ethics，伦理学——到底什么是对的，什么是错的，什么是正义的？为什么是不道德？

如果你是 Omelas 的一员，你会不会去救他呢？看大家陷入了沉思，没有人讨论。我想问，如果你是其中一员，你会怎么选？

其实，现实生活中有没有类似的情形？有。这很像我们上次提到过的 trolley problem，电车难题。大家还记得那个设定吗？拉下杠杆就能改变电车的方向：你拉杆，它就改变方向，撞死另一边的那一个人；你不改变方向，轨道上的那五个人都会死。我记得上次你们当中大多数人都选择不改变方向。那么来到这个问题，我们看好像更多的人选择去救。

但这还不太一样：一旦你救了他，全城人的美好生活都会消失。这才是真正让罪恶发生的情况。这是不是也是一种罪？你牺牲的不光是你自己的生活，而是全城所有人的。

所以这是一篇科幻小说。它的设定没有进一步交代，是虚构出来的，而这个孩子则充满了痛苦。如果把它变为现实生活，现实生活当中可能是比较复杂的：有美好存在，也有痛苦。

大家还记得上节课说的 characteristic 吗？科幻小说的一个特点，就是引导读者去思考一些我们习以为常、认为理所当然的问题。

那就是通过这种科幻式创设的情境，逼着你去思考。刚刚有四五位同学说，你去救他，那你可能会遭受到更多人的谴责——实际上你破坏了所有人的美好生活，换来的可能仅仅是让这一个孩子的生活条件稍稍改善了一下。你愿意吗？如果你认为是这样，那你坚持的是一种什么道理？

我相信肯定有同学不愿意救。因为你造成的会是更多的罪恶。在这种情形下，你的选择就是一种后果论——consequence，根据结果来衡量我做选择，来决定我是否要去救他。

好，今天课上到这。课下给大家安排一个小作业：大家用 AI 去生成一下这个孩子的生活，做一个小视频，做得更原始一点的就好。

